Over the course of the Gaza war, which began in 2023, the State of Israel has been accused by hundreds of humanitarian and human rights organizations (NGOs, INGOs, and IGOs) of perpetrating a genocide targeting the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip. This accusation became more widespread among the international community as formal statements declaring the Gaza genocide to be a fact were increasingly issued by several prominent and reputable organizations around the world upon the conclusion of comprehensive academic and legal investigations on the matter, including: the United Nations (via a special committee and commission of inquiry), the International Association of Genocide Scholars, the Lemkin Institute for Genocide Prevention, Genocide Watch, Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, and Médecins Sans Frontières. As a result, many countries have recognized the Gaza genocide, while others have deferred their position on recognition in the ongoing International Court of Justice case brought by South Africa. A number of countries besides Israel have denied the Gaza genocide on various grounds.
Throughout 2023 and 2024, humanitarian and human rights groups sometimes implied that Israel's actions in the Gaza Strip may constitute genocide without explicitly accusing Israel of genocide. However, these implications largely shifted to explicit accusations of genocide when International Criminal Court arrest warrants for Israeli leaders were issued in November 2024; Israel's prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and former defence minister Yoav Gallant have been charged with and are wanted for war crimes and crimes against humanity, particularly for facilitating starvation as a method of warfare, which caused the Gaza Strip famine.
Israel has been characterized as engaging in four of the five acts constituting the crime of genocide under Article 2 of the Genocide Convention of 1948, with the only absent genocidal act being a perpetrator's forcible transfer of children belonging to the targeted group. The most frequent allegation against Israel in this context is that it has "inflicted conditions of life calculated to destroy" Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. Specific acts cited by groups charging Israel with the crime of genocide include: practicing collective punishment, particularly by restricting Palestinians' access to basic necessities, such as food, water, fuel, and electricity; destroying medical infrastructure and services, causing the collapse of the Gaza Strip healthcare system; destroying civilian infrastructure, such as schools and cultural heritage sites; engaging in sexual and gender-based violence, especially to destroy Palestinian women; shooting and bombing civilians (extermination), which has disproportionately impacted Palestinian children; and violating various international conventions by engaging in chemical warfare, particularly with white phosphorus munitions. The intensity of Israel's military offensives into the Gaza Strip, particularly that of the bombing campaigns, has been cited as the primary cause of the Gaza Strip humanitarian crisis that has caused Palestinian societal breakdown across the territory.
Additional actions commonly cited by groups as proof of Israeli genocidal intent include the use of dehumanizing language for Palestinians; repeated forced displacement of Palestinians; the failure of Israeli soldiers to distinguish between Palestinian combatants and non-combatants in official justifications for relevant incidents; the minimization of the Israeli military's moral and legal obligation as a belligerent force to take any measures necessary to protect all civilians during combat operations; the failure of Israel's government to comply with a January 2024 order by the International Court of Justice to immediately halt military activity in the Gaza Strip, address and prevent or punish genocidal incitement, and lift restrictions on humanitarian aid and services entering the territory; the ignoring or downplaying by Israel's government of humanitarian alerts by the United Nations and other international bodies with regard to mass civilian death in the Gaza Strip; the number of health workers killed; the number of journalists killed; and inflammatory statements by numerous Israeli government and military officials, such as dystopian references to biblical passages and overt declarations of support for actions illegal under international law.


== List ==


== United Nations ==
Officials of the United Nations have made statements alluding to the Gaza genocide throughout the course of the war.

In November 2023, a group of UN special rapporteurs wrote, "We remain convinced that the Palestinian people are at grave risk of genocide." UN Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation Pedro Arrojo said that based on the Rome Statute, which counts "deprivation of access to food or medicine, among others" as a form of extermination, "even if there is no clear intention, the data show that the war is heading towards genocide". A group of UN human rights experts said there was "evidence of increasing genocidal incitement" against Palestinians.
In response to a January 2024 Times of Israel report that the Israeli government was in talks with the Congolese government to take Palestinian refugees from Gaza, the UN special rapporteur Balakrishnan Rajagopal said, "Forcible transfer of Gazan population is an act of genocide."
In May 2024, UN Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women Reem Alsalem said that Palestinian women "are experiencing a full-blown genocide. They are being exterminated. There are few places in the world where we've seen something like this." The UNHCR Special Rapporteur on adequate housing, Balakrishnan Rajagopal, said that Israel's destruction of Gaza "constitutes an act of genocide as well because the purpose of that destruction, exceeding 70 to 80 per cent across Gaza, is to make the place uninhabitable".
In October 2024, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights released a report that accused the Israeli military of "the crime against humanity of extermination" for killing health workers and targeting health facilities.
On 8 November 2024, the United Nations human rights office condemned many violations of international law that "could amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and possibly even 'genocide'", calling on third states to prevent "atrocity crimes".
On 14 November 2024, the UN Special Committee to investigate Israeli practices concluded that they are consistent with the characteristics of genocide.
In February 2025, UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food Michael Fakhri said that Israel is committing a genocide and is working to "slow down its genocide through a starvation campaign", concluding that the United States and Germany were complicit in the ensuing famine.
In May 2025, twenty UN independent experts and four working groups issued a statement accusing Israel of genocide and criticising the debate over the genocide terminology: "While States debate terminology – is it or is it not genocide? – Israel continues its relentless destruction of life in Gaza, through attacks by land, air and sea, displacing and massacring the surviving population with impunity ... States must act swiftly to end the unfolding genocide, dismantle apartheid, and secure a future in which Palestinians and Israelis coexist in freedom and dignity."
In May 2025, UN Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Tom Fletcher urged world leaders to act decisively to prevent genocide in Gaza. The US has vetoed UN Security Council ceasefire resolutions on Gaza six times, remaining the sole opponent while all 14 other members backed the calls.
In September 2025, the UN Human Rights Council's Independent International Commission of Inquiry issued a report concluding that Israel is committing genocide against Palestinians in Gaza. The Commission found reasonable grounds to determine that Israeli authorities and security forces have committed, and continue to commit, four of the five genocidal acts defined under the 1948 Genocide Convention: killing members of the group; causing serious bodily or mental harm; deliberately inflicting conditions of life calculated to bring about the group's physical destruction in whole or in part; and imposing measures intended to prevent births. The Commission further determined that genocidal intent is the only reasonable inference from the totality of evidence, and that Israeli political and military leaders have incited the commission of genocide. The Commission has characterised its findings as the most authoritative UN determination to date on the Gaza war. Israeli officials, the US State Department, and the US-and Israel-backed Gaza Humanitarian Foundation (GHF) condemned the report. Netanyahu denied its core findings on starvation, while the GHF called the report a collection of "falsehoods" that "rewards bad actors and undermines" humanitarian efforts.


== Other international organizations ==
In February 2024 the then-African Union Commission Chairperson Moussa Faki said: "Gaza is being completely annihilated and its people are deprived of all their rights. We denounce the Israeli operation, which has no parallel in the history of humanity." The official communiqué of the 38th summit of the African Union stated that "Israel is committing genocide against the Palestinians and must be prosecuted internationally."
On 26 March, Pakistan's OIC representative said that Israel's desire for a "final solution to the Palestinian question is plain for all to see, as its forces encircle Rafah like vultures and its ravenous land grab continues unabated". In May 2024, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation called on member states to end "the export of weapons and ammunition used by its army to perpetrate the crime of genocide in Gaza".
On 16 August 2025, 31 Arab and Islamic countries and the Arab League released a joint statement condemning "Israel's crimes of aggression, genocide, and ethnic cleansing" in Gaza, and highlighted the need to ensure access to humanitarian aid to "halt the systematic starvation policy used by Israel as a weapon of genocide." A month later, the European Parliament passed a resolution on the Gaza war, which in its initial form mentioned "genocidal actions" from Israel, but this was ultimately omitted at the request of the European People's Party.


== See also ==
Gaza genocide recognition
Academic and legal responses to the Gaza genocide
Template:Expert opinions in the Gaza genocide debate


== Footnotes ==


== References ==