The South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) was inaugurated in October 1995 as an independent chapter nine institution. It draws its mandate from the South African Constitution by way of the Human Rights Commission Act of 1994.


== Commissioners ==
A seven-year term is given to appointees.


=== 2009/2010 ===
Seven commissioners were appointed for a seven-year term in 2009/2010, namely Adv Lawrence Mushwana, Dr Pregaluxmi Govender, Ms Lindiwe Mokate, Adv Bokankatla Malatji, Adv Loyiso Mpumlwana, Ms Janet Love (part-time) and Dr Danfred Titus (part-time). Mushwana, who was previously the Public Protector, was elected Chairperson and Govender was elected Deputy Chairperson in October 2009. In July 2010, the National Assembly's justice committee decided unanimously that Mpumlwana's failure to disclose a civil judgement against him during the nomination process meant that he was not fit and proper to serve on the SAHRC.
In February 2014, Advocate Mohamed Shafie Ameermia was appointed commissioner focusing on housing and access to justice.


=== 2017 ===
For the seven-year term in 2017, Bongani Christopher Majola was appointed Chairperson of the South African Human Rights Commission, with Fatima Chohan the Deputy Chairperson. The full-time commissioners were Adv Bokankatla Joseph Malatji, Philile Ntuli, Adv Andre Hurtley Gaum, Matlhodi Angelina (Angie) Makwetla. The part-time commissioners were Adv Jonas Ben Sibanyoni and Christoffel Nissen.


== Criticism and controversies ==
The commission has been involved in a number of controversies ranging from accusations of racial double standards, promoting racist practices, political bias, to hosting a toxic work culture.


=== Accusations of racial double standards ===
The trade union Solidarity has criticised the commission for what it claims is racial bias and prejudice. A comparative study revealed that the SAHRC is much more likely to self-initiate investigation where the perpetrator is white, and that it is more lenient in its punishment of black perpetrators.
Complaints were laid at the SAHRC against controversial politician Julius Malema regarding several statements he had made. Malema has sung "kill the Boer" (Boer meaning white South African/Afrikaner), that he "was not calling for the slaughter of whites, yet" and had made racist remarks against Indian South Africans, accusing them of exploiting black people. In March 2019 the SAHRC stated that Malema's comments were not found to be hate-speech, claiming to have found no basis in law for Malema's comments to be ruled as hate speech. This was despite Malema being found guilty in 2011 by the Johannesburg High Court of hate speech for chanting "Shoot the Boer".
Dr. Shanelle Van Der Berg of the SAHRC justified the SAHRC's ruling on Malema by stating that the council applies different thresholds of what constitutes hate speech depending on the context, due to the nation's history. Priscilla Jana, a commissioner responsible for race and equity issues, has stated that the SAHRC is "purposefully lenient to black offenders in incidents concerning racial utterances made to white victims because of the historical context".
In July 2023, the Johannesburg High Court set aside the SAHRC ruling that Julius Malema's utterances at a 2016 gathering were not hate speech.


=== Political bias ===

In November 2024 the Daily Maverick reported that the commissions' report into the cause of the July 2021 unrest had been doctored so as to drop any mention of President Jacob Zuma's arrest being connected to the incident. The Daily Maverick's report stated that SAHRC employees working on the report were pressured by the commission's chairperson, Chris Nissen, and the SAHRC Commissioner Philile Ntuli to remove any findings that connected the cause of the riots to Jacob Zuma thereby indicating a notable political bias within the organisation to protect the former president. 
The SAHRC CEO, Vusumuzi Mkhize, was placed on precautionary suspension in 2024 for making politically and racially disparaging remarks about the then newly formed Government of National Unity in a hot mic incident.
The South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) faced procedural challenges in filling vacant leadership positions during 2025. On October 16, 2025, the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development adopted a report recommending that the National Assembly begin the process of appointing a new commissioner from scratch. The roots of this stumbling block lie in the resignation of the Commission's Vice-President, Fatma Chauhan, which took effect on April 1, 2024.
Although Parliament reduced the list of candidates to eight names and interviewed them in November 2024, deliberations on April 2, 2025 led to an internal legal dispute. The dispute centered on the eligibility of committee members who were absent from interviews to participate in deliberations and voting, which necessitated a request for procedural advice on the application of Rule 115 of the National Assembly Rules. By its May 28, 2025, meeting, the committee announced its inability to agree on any candidate for the full-time commissioner or vice president positions, ultimately recommending the cancellation and relaunch of the previous process to ensure the integrity of appointments. [1]


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site of the South African Human Rights Commission